---
layout: mendokusai
author: Jonny Spicer
title: Makeup
tags: [ Misc ]
---
Makeup is a pretty odd thing in our society - there is a certain amount of expectation to wear it, and a certain expectation of men
not to. As a man, I know I don't really understand makeup or the reasons why women wear it or the expectations they face as a result
of it, however similarly as a man I'm going to talk about it regardless of whether or not I have any relevant experience or have even
spent a meaningful amount of time considering the issues and statements which I am about to make. Because hey, that's what men do.

After throwing my gender under the bus a little, I would like to offer some brief words in our collective defense. When a boy says
"I wish girls didn't wear so much makeup" or "you look better without it", of course they very likely do not understand what they
are on about - however, I think their intention is at least somewhat pure, and in my opinion that's important. We are trying to say
that we feel guilty, possibly about a variety of things, or that we hope you love yourself and the way you look both with and without
makeup, or even perhaps that we are a little jealous that it isn't socially acceptable for us to wear it yet. Of course we do not
actually articulate those sentiments (and perhaps there would be other issues even if we did), but we're men, not saying how we
really feel is our jam. As for those of us who say to hurry up - for them I have words of mitigation, and frankly they can go in the 
bin.

---

I really do wish it were socially acceptable for men to wear makeup - I would love to be able to spend some time and effort on my
appearance and feel better about the way I looked as a result (although naturally I would not want that to come with any of the 
expectations that may accompany it). Sadly I will not be upending social convention and breaking the mould any time soon - I simply
don't have the confidence and self-assuredness required, and would like to prioritise picking other battles over this one in 
particular. Still, there is a decent amount of subtle makeup men can get away with, and I am still hopeful that I will get to attend
a Halloween party as Wednesday Addams this year.
